---
title: Book Project
layout: page
permalink: /dissertation/index.html
---

### Book Project


**Dissertation and Book Project: Religiously Conservative Parties and Women’s Political Mobilization** (Click [here](https://www.dropbox.com/s/egzb70nq6751vft/writing_sample_hq_chowdhury.pdf?dl=0) for the introduction and two empirical chapters.)

Women constitute half of India's electorate, yet its politics has traditionally been a forum for men to participate and articulate their interests. In this context, the 2014 national election marked a watershed for Indian politics--there was an unprecedented increase in women's participation. Between 2009 and 2014, women’s presence in rallies, party meetings, and canvassing activities increased by 27% . Paradoxically, this growth was most pronounced among women voting for the BJP, whose ideology of political Hinduism, or _Hindutva_, prescribes traditional gender roles for women. What explains the BJP's success at engaging women despite its ideology of masculine Hindu nationalism? And what are the effects of this engagement on women's agency and democratic practice? 

Women’s political activism in these publicly partisan ways is especially surprising because of the deeply patriarchal contexts in which it is taking place. Here, social, and cultural norms militate against women’s entry into partisan spaces, rendering participation costly for women and their families. Consequently, men act as gatekeepers to women entering public spaces. However I argue that religiously conservative parties, perhaps counter-intuitively, may be able to lower these costs. The BJP’s ability to mobilize women stems from framing its politics as _seva_, a powerful norm of selfless service that overlaps women's domestic caregiving roles as mothers and dutiful wives. 

My core argument is that framing politics as _seva_ connects the political sphere to the private, creating the conditions that enable women’s active participation. There are two mechanisms through which this works. The language of _seva_ presents politics in a positive and familiar light to women who see it as a natural and comprehensible extension of their domestic roles. Second, and related, because of this reinforcement of women’s traditional roles, political _seva_ does not challenge men’s authority within the family, or patriarchal structures of power at large. Consequently, men unblock women’s participation when it is articulated in terms of _seva_.  

I develop—and test—this argument through a multi-method approach. Over three years (2018 to 2021), I conducted ethnographies, participant observation, shadowing, focus group discussions, and in-depth interviews and interactions with 132 politicians and party activists, as well as more than 100 citizens. Next, I scraped nearly half a million tweets from political parties and leaders and analyzed their contents to understand communication and mobilization rhetoric. Finally, I designed and administered two surveys—with four embedded experiments—to women party activists (n = 128), and female citizens and male gatekeepers in 1,457 households (n = 2,914 respondents). Together, these analyses show (a) how the right-wing BJP uses seva to frame its politics, engage and recruit women, and (b) the causal effect of seva in enabling women’s public participation and circumventing male gatekeeping.  

What does this mean for women’s agency? _Seva_ enhances women’s mobility and public recognition. Furthermore, because women serve society by occupying a position of power, _seva_ reverses power hierarchies between the private and public spheres, allowing women a modicum of agency. Yet, the feminine identified qualities of sacrifice and selflessness inherent to _seva_ limit the open pursuit of political ambition, and women’s participation continues to be subject to the approval of domestic gatekeepers. 

Although my main analysis is set in India, my argument applies to a wide range of contexts where patriarchal norms constrain women’s mobility to exit the private sphere. Using a range of country case studies across Europe, the Americas, and Asia, I show how calls to social service, and to defend motherhood, morality, and tradition have been powerful tools in the hands of conservative parties and religious movements when seeking to mobilize women across Catholic, Evangelical, and Islamic conventions. 

My research bridges different traditions in the study of religion, gender, and political participation. First, it shows how political participation is an outcome of the interaction between the political and private spheres, where political parties can shape perceptions of women’s participation within the home and in society. Second, it bridges institutional and behavioral approaches by highlighting the vital role of social norms in sustaining conservative movements, as well as in determining the political inclusion of marginalized groups.  

In addition, I shed light on two questions with relevance to party politics and democratization. First, I highlight how conservative parties can expand beyond their narrow elite base by incorporating women, thereby reducing concessions to non-core groups. Second, I draw attention to an important but understudied tension between political engagement and democratic deepening. Much empirical research implicitly assumes higher—and more equal—participation to be positively associated with democratic health. Yet, the Indian case of democratic backsliding amidst rising participation belies this. My book shows that the answer to this puzzle can partially be found in the increased deployment of traditional norms like seva as a strategy of political engagement and recruitment. Although seva does nurture agency, it is not antagonistic to existing power structures. It, therefore, crowds out assertive models of citizenship that prioritize individuals’ rights, voices, and accountability-seeking behavior that are features of robust democracies. Hence, the mechanisms that enable the inclusion of marginalized groups in the world’s largest democracy can help us understand political transformations in other countries as conservative, right-wing, populist, and nationalist movements gain traction across the globe. 
